DOCS-1568: Add Flutter app tutorial (#2432)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/tutorials/control/flutter-app.md

The instructions on the Flutter website cover not only the installation of the SDK itself, but also the development target-related tools and the editor plugins.
For this walkthrough, you only need to install the following:

- Flutter SDK
- Visual Studio Code with the Flutter extension
- The software required by your chosen development target.
  For example:
  - [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/) to target macOS
    - When prompted, do install Cocoapods.
      You need it to support the iOS simulator.
  - [Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/) to target Windows

## Create a project

### Create your first Flutter project

1. Launch VS Code and open the command palette (with `F1` or `Ctrl+Shift+P` or `Shift+Cmd+P`).

2. Start typing "flutter new."
   Select the **Flutter: New Project** command.

{{<imgproc src="/tutorials/flutter-app/flutter-new-project.png" resize="1200x" style="max-width:800px" declared-dimensions="true" alt="Creating a new project in VS Code.">}}

3. Next, select **Application** and then a folder in which to create your project.
   This could be your home directory, or something like <file>C:\src\</file>.

> 4. Finally, name your project something like <file>smart_machine_app</file> or <file>my_awesome_smart_machine</file>.

Author: true true

   {{% /alert %}}

   3. Next, open another configuration file in the project, <file>analysis_options.yaml</file>.
      This file determines how strict Flutter should be when analyzing your code.
      Since this is your first foray into Flutter, you're telling the analyzer to take it easy.
      You can always tune this later.
      In fact, as you get closer to publishing an actual production app, you will almost certainly want to make the analyzer stricter than this.

   4. Replace its contents with the following:

   ```yaml {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
   include: package:flutter_lints/flutter.yaml

   linter:
     rules:
       avoid_print: false
       prefer_const_constructors_in_immutables: false
       prefer_const_constructors: false
       prefer_const_literals_to_create_immutables: false
       prefer_final_fields: false
       unnecessary_breaks: true
       use_key_in_widget_constructors: false
   ```

### Configure iOS-specific code

Now you'll update some configurations in the iOS-specific code to support the [Viam Flutter SDK](https://flutter.viam.dev/).

1. Open <file>ios/Podfile</file>.

>    If Podfile does not exist in that directory, you can generate it by running `flutter pub get` in the root directory of your app.

Reviewer: nit: consider where to run:

```suggestion
   If Podfile does not exist in that directory, you can generate it by running `flutter pub get` in the root directory of your app from the [integrated VS Code terminal](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/terminal/basics).
```

(actual link is likely overkill, feel free to omit!)

Author: Can't they run this command from the root of the directory from another terminal?

   At the top of the file you will see the following lines:

   ```{class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
   # Uncomment this line to define a global platform for your project
   # platform :ios, '11.0'
   ```

>    Change that to this:

Reviewer: Nit: little more context over this and that:

```suggestion
   Update that code to match the following:
```

Great call on including the first line comment in both code sections, big agree: that really helps it stand out that we are _uncommenting_ a line to make a change. 👍

Author: Clint's doing! I agree it makes it very clear!

   ```{class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
   # Uncomment this line to define a global platform for your project
   platform :ios, '13.0'
   ```

2. Open <file>ios/Runner/Info.plist</file>.
   It will look something like this:

>    {{<imgproc src="/tutorials/flutter-app/info-plist.png" resize="1200x" style="max-width:900px" declared-dimensions="true" alt="The info.plist file open in VS Code. The second line includes 'doctype plist public' and an Apple URL. The fourth line is a dict tag. The fifth line is a key, and subsequent lines contain keys, strings and arrays.">}}

Reviewer: This image appears to _underlay_ the right-TOC making it transparent on smaller displays (happen to be reviewing on 13" laptop atm)! Woah, never seen that before! Tricky here because we need zoom for tiny text. Do you think we could crop this to only show the file? Ah, I really like the "full IDE view" though too. I'm not sure what to do about this.

Author: Is it time? https://viam.atlassian.net/browse/DOCS-1584

3. Insert this code into the first line after the `<dict>`:

   ```{class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
     <key>NSLocalNetworkUsageDescription</key>
     <string>Smart Machine App requires access to your device's local network to connect to your devices.</string>
     <key>NSBonjourServices</key>
     <array>
         <string>_rpc._tcp</string>
     </array>
   ```

   {{<imgproc src="/tutorials/flutter-app/info-plist-insert.png" resize="1200x" style="max-width:900px" declared-dimensions="true" alt="The info.plist file open in VS Code. An arrow labeled 'insert here' indicates that you should insert the code right after the fourth line in the file.">}}

>    It should look like this:

Reviewer: Supernit: lil' more clarity of this n that:

```suggestion
   The file should now look like the following:
```

   {{<imgproc src="/tutorials/flutter-app/info-plist-pasted.png" resize="1200x" style="max-width:900px" declared-dimensions="true" alt="The resulting file. After the non-indented <dict> tag on the fourth line, the pasted key, string, key, and array (containing an indented string) are indented inside the dict tag, spanning lines five through ten. The pasted content is at the same level of indentation as the rest of the keys and strings below it.">}}

### Create the main file

> 1. Open the <file>main.dart</file> file under the <file>lib/</file> directory.

Reviewer: supernit: Previously we used this kinda notation:

```suggestion
1. Open the <file>lib/main.dart</file> file.
```

No real preference, just a vote for consistency, esp since IDE left-nav shows folder structure so prominently.

Author: can do

> 2. Replace the contents of this file with the following code to make up the login screen for your app:

Reviewer: Nit: separate action from reason. `Replacing` doesn't technically itself `make`. Maybe something like:

```suggestion
2. Replace the contents of this file with the following code, which is responsible for the functionality of the login screen for your app:
```

Author: I mean in this case we are replacing a completely non-Viam-related demo screen with something useful, and the something does in fact include widgets and such which comprise the login screen. I worry that focusing only on the "functionality" implies that the login screen would be there anyway, but just wouldn't do anything. I think without this file change, it'd be a counter with a little button in the corner you can click to up the counter. The following code creates a non-functional button, so it actually doesn't create functionality but it does create a "Login" button that doesn't do anything. If the OG text is a no-go, is the following better?
```suggestion
2. Replace the contents of this file with the following code, which creates the scaffold of your app's login screen:
```

   ```{class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
   import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
   import 'package:flutter_dotenv/flutter_dotenv.dart';

   void main() async {
      await dotenv.load();
     runApp(MyApp());
   }

   class MyApp extends StatelessWidget {
     const MyApp({super.key});

     @override
     Widget build(BuildContext context) {
       return MaterialApp(
         title: 'Smart Machine App',
         theme: ThemeData(
           colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSeed(seedColor: Colors.purple),
         ),
         home: MyHomePage(),
       );
     }
   }

   class MyHomePage extends StatelessWidget {
     @override
     Widget build(BuildContext context) {
       return Scaffold(
         body: Center(
           child: Column(
             mainAxisAlignment: MainAxisAlignment.center,
             children: [
               Text('Smart Machine App'),
               SizedBox(height: 16),
               ElevatedButton(onPressed: null, child: Text('Login')),
             ],
           ),
         ),
       );
     }
   }

   ```

>    If you chose a name other than `Smart Machine App`, edit lines 13 and 30 with your own app title.

Reviewer: Supernit: we've since named other things too:

```suggestion
   If you chose a name other than `Smart Machine App` for your project, edit lines 13 and 30 with your own app title.
```

### Launch the app

> In this section of the tutorial we'll build the app and see what it looks like so far.

Reviewer: Nit: talking to the user:

```suggestion
You now have enough of your new app configured to be able to build it.
Follow the steps below to build and preview the current state of your app.
```

or something similar. Vflexible.

Author: ```suggestion
You now have enough of your new app coded to be able to build and test a rendering of it.

Follow the steps below to build and preview the current state of your app.
```
I would prefer to use a word other than "configured" to save that for JSON files, and I think some folks might not know what "build" means in this context. Does this suggestion still look technically accurate?

1. Open <file>lib/main.dart</file>.

>    In the bottom right corner of VS Code, you'll find a button that shows the current target device.

Reviewer: nit: to keep things actionable, and present:

```suggestion
   In the bottom right corner of VS Code, find the button that shows the current target device.
```

   Click the button to change your target device.
   Make sure that you have your target device selected before you continue.

   {{<imgproc src="/tutorials/flutter-app/target-device-button.png" resize="1200x" style="max-width:900px" declared-dimensions="true" alt="A VS Code window with main.dart open. In the bottom right corner, there is a target device button labeled 'iPhone 14 (ios simulator)'.">}}

2. With <file>lib/main.dart</file> still open, find the "Start Debugging" button in the upper right corner of the VS Code window.

>    Click it.

Reviewer: Supernit: moving what button do to before it:

```suggestion
   Click the button to build and render your app
```

   {{<imgproc src="/tutorials/flutter-app/main-play.png" resize="1200x" style="max-width:900px" declared-dimensions="true" alt="A VS Code window with main.dart open. In the top right corner, there is a button labeled 'Start Debugging' with an icon of a bug and a 'play' symbol.">}}

>    A window should open up, displaying a rendering of your smart machine app:

Reviewer: nit: tiny clarification, directing user eyes:

```suggestion
   A new window should open on top of VS Code, displaying a rendering of your smart machine app:
```

Author: For me it showed up somewhere else because I had VS Code in full screen...Maybe we don't have to be too specific??

   {{<imgproc src="/tutorials/flutter-app/render1.png" resize="1200x" style="max-width:300px" declared-dimensions="true" alt="Rendering of an iPhone with the app open on the screen. The screen is white with the words 'Smart Machine App' in the middle, above a grayed-out login button.">}}

## Add app navigation

### Add a new screen

Great work so far!

> You have your app running, with a single screen and an inactive button.

Reviewer: Nit: to avoid `have`:

```suggestion
Your app is successfully running, and features a single screen and an inactive button.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Your app is successfully running, with a single screen and an inactive button.
```
I want to preserve the author's casual tone in this tute as much as is practical

> Next you will add a new screen that pulls in some information from your {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="organization" text="organization" >}} in Viam, and then navigate to that screen from the login button.

Reviewer: Nit: actionable and present, and "navigate" is not for the user to do right now, but for the app to facilitate then.

```suggestion
Next, add a new screen that pulls in some information from your {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="organization" text="organization" >}} in Viam
This new screen will be accessed by clicking on the login button.
```

or "accessed from the login button" is fine.

Author: I see what you're saying but, I don't want to use imperative mood here since we're not directing them to do anything _just_ yet. Was thinking it's okay to use this mood when we're transitioning before future steps? Also "accessed..." feels more formal in tone than much of the tutorial

> In the VS Code file explorer, right click <file>lib/</file> and click **New File** - let’s name this new file <file>home_screen.dart</file>.

Reviewer: Nit: actionable:

```suggestion
In the VS Code file explorer on the left-hand side, right click <file>lib/</file> and click **New File**, then name the new file <file>home_screen.dart</file>.
```

Author: Ooh yes oversight on my part

> Paste the contents of this code block into that new file:

Reviewer: Nit: mention of "code block" gently hints a VS Code or my_new_app UI element with matching text. Users more familiar with "the code below" or similar:

```suggestion
Paste the following code into the <file>home_screen.dart</file> file you just created:
```

    // Navigator.of(context)
    //     .push(MaterialPageRoute(builder: (_) => LocationScreen(_viam, location)));
  }

  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Scaffold(
      appBar: AppBar(title: const Text('Locations')),
      // If we are loading, show a loading indicator.
      // Otherwise, show a list of [Locations]s.
      body: _loading
          ? Center(
              child: const CircularProgressIndicator.adaptive(),
            )
          : // Build a list from the [_locations] state.
          ListView.builder(
              itemCount: _locations.length,
              itemBuilder: (_, index) {
                final location = _locations[index];
                return ListTile(
                  title: Text(location.name),
                  onTap: () => _navigateToLocation(location),
                  trailing: const Icon(Icons.chevron_right),
                );
              },
            ),
    );
  }
}
```

### Get the Viam API key

Notice in the file the following line:

```{class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
_viam = await Viam.withApiKey(dotenv.env['API_KEY_ID']?? '', dotenv.env['API_KEY']?? '');
```

> You need to get the API keys from the Viam app and store them in an environmental variables file to so your mobile app can access your smart machine:

Reviewer: Nit: While the API key indeed has two parts, we still refer to it in the singular. Plural is for when I rotate between multiple keys, or have multiple keys with different perms, or whatever.

Also, here's an opportunity for some light "what is a key" clarification. Maybe something like:

```suggestion
This line in the code defines how your Flutter app authenticates to the Viam platform, by referencing two environment variables that together comprise your Viam API key.
Follow the steps below to get your API key and create an environmental variables file to store them in:
```

Author: ```suggestion
This line in the code defines how your Flutter app authenticates to the Viam platform, by referencing two environment variables that together comprise your Viam API key.

Follow the steps below to get your API key and create an environment variables file to store them in:
```
Great suggestion. Just going to change "environmental" to "environment" in the second instance since that seems more common?

1. In your project folder, create a file to store your API keys.
   Name it <file>.env</file>.
   Copy and paste these two lines into the file:

   ```{class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
   API_KEY_ID="PASTE YOUR API KEY ID HERE"
   API_KEY="PASTE YOUR API KEY HERE"
   ```

2. Go to the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and log in.

3. Click the organization dropdown menu on the right side of the top banner.
   If you're not already in the organization you want to connect to, click the correct organization name to navigate to it.

   {{<imgproc src="/tutorials/flutter-app/org-dropdown.png" resize="1200x" style="max-width:800px" declared-dimensions="true" alt="The Viam web app with the organization dropdown labeled 'Clint's Org' highlighted.">}}

4. Click the organization dropdown menu again and click **Settings**.

5. Scroll to the **API Keys** section.
   You can find and use an existing API key for your smart machine, or you can create a new one for this application.

>    For this tutorial we will create a new one:

Reviewer: I'm OK with "we" here, but if others chime in with "you", you'd actually omit both!

```suggestion
   To create a new one:
```

   1. Click **Generate key**.

>    2. Give the key a name like "flutter-app-my-org-name."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   2. Give the key a name like "flutter-app-my-org-name".
```

Oh wait, this is a thing, quotation marks and periods. I have no preference, ignore me, don't shoot.

Author: Lol wait I caught this earlier and changed it to be period then quotation mark, since that's correct right? If it was monospace that'd be a different story, but since it isn't monospace I should leave as-is right? With period then quotation?

   3. Click the **Resource** dropdown and select your organization.
   4. Set **Role** to **Owner**.
   5. Click **Generate key**.

>    6. The new key populates at the bottom of the list.

Reviewer: Nit: to avoid passive:

```suggestion
   6. Find your new key at the bottom of the list.
```

### Connect the login button to the home screen

In VS Code, reopen <file>main.dart</file>.

Add the following line to the imports at the top of the file:

```{class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
import 'home_screen.dart';
```

Change `ElevatedButton` in the `Column` to the following:

```{class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
            ElevatedButton(
                onPressed: () => Navigator.of(context)
                    .push(MaterialPageRoute(builder: (_) => HomeScreen())),
                child: Text('Login'),
            ),
```

Run the mobile application simulator again to see how your changes have taken effect.
Now, when you tap the login button, the app uses the API key to get the list of locations in your organization.
It displays the names of the locations on a new screen:

{{<gif webm_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/locations-list.webm" mp4_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/locations-list.mp4" alt="Rendering of a mobile app. Log in is clicked, and then all the locations in Clint's organization are shown. One of them is clicked, but nothing changes because there is no screen associated with that button yet." max-width="300px">}}

## Add more screens

> ### Add a location screen

Reviewer: For location and robot sections, I'd love a single intro sentence to each that answers "why"

I know it's in the code comment, but the sentence is picked up by SEO, etc, and by my eyes before I even look at the code. Helps to frame why I am reading this section, or if I should skip to next.

Author: ```suggestion
### Add a location screen

So far, you have an app that displays a list of {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="location" text="locations" >}}, but nothing happens when you tap a location name.
In this step you will add functionality so that tapping a location name brings you to the list of {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="smart machine" text="smart machines" >}} in that location.
```

In VS Code create a new file in the same folder as <file>main.dart</file> and <file>home_screen.dart</file>.
Name it <file>location_screen.dart</file>.

> Paste the following code into the file:

Reviewer: Nit nit:

```suggestion
Paste the following code into the <file>location_screen.dart</file> you just created:
```

If too cumbersome, I'm ok as is.

Author: I think it's unnecessary

    final robotClient = await widget._viam.getRobotClient(widget.robot);
    setState(() {
      client = robotClient;
      _isLoading = false;
    });
  }

  /// A computed variable that returns the available [ResourceName]s of
  /// this robot in an alphabetically sorted list.
  List<ResourceName> get _sortedResourceNames {
    return client.resourceNames..sort((a, b) => a.name.compareTo(b.name));
  }

  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Scaffold(
        appBar: AppBar(title: Text(widget.robot.name)),
        body: _isLoading
            ? const Center(child: CircularProgressIndicator.adaptive())
            : ListView.builder(
                itemCount: client.resourceNames.length,
                itemBuilder: (_, index) {
                  final resourceName = _sortedResourceNames[index];
                  return ListTile(
                    title: Text(resourceName.name),
                    subtitle: Text(
                        '${resourceName.namespace}:${resourceName.type}:${resourceName.subtype}'),
                  );
                }));
  }
}

```

### Connect the screens together

> Now that you have the code for the screens in place, it's time to enable navigation between them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have the code for the screens in place, you can enable navigation between them.
```

Author: Okay adding, but I worry that this presents it as an option instead of as a "this is what you need to do now for your app to make any sense." Thoughts?

{{<gif webm_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/demo.webm" mp4_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/demo.mp4" alt="Rendering of the mobile app. Log in is clicked, then all Clint's locations are shown, Clint's Desk it clicked, all its smart machines are listed, and then desk-robot is clicked, showing a list of components and services belonging to that smart machine." max-width="300px">}}

## Next steps

Congratulations!
You have successfully made a Flutter app integrated with Viam!

At this point you could customize the robot screen to have more functionality to control the machine or to show data from the robot in neat ways.
The Viam GitHub repo contains [more example apps](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-flutter-sdk/tree/main/example) for your reference.

Flutter is a very powerful tool for building user interfaces.
You can stylize the look and feel of your app to match your brand.
Look around [the Flutter documentation](https://docs.flutter.dev/) to learn how.

Before releasing your app to the app stores you’ll need to add an authentication flow to your app instead of adding API keys as environment variables.

> If you need assistance with this, reach out to us on our Discord and we’ll be happy to help.

Reviewer: This works for me, nice!

---
title: "Build a Flutter App that Integrates with Viam"
linkTitle: "Build a Flutter App"
type: "docs"
description: "Use Viam's Flutter SDK to build a custom mobile app to show your machines and their components."
webmSrc: "/tutorials/flutter-app/demo.webm"
mp4Src: "/tutorials/flutter-app/demo.mp4"
videoAlt: "An example Viam-integrated Flutter app."
tags: ["sdk", "flutter"]
authors: ["Clint Purser"]
languages: ["flutter"]
viamresources: ["base"]
level: "Intermediate"
date: "2024-01-17"
cost: "0"
---

<div class="td-max-width-on-larger-screens">

>  <div class="alignleft" style="max-width:250px; margin-right:40px">

Author: Looking at other tutorials, it doesn't seen necessary on them. The reason I included it here is because the bullet points don't align correctly--see also tables with unordered lists in them, where the text aligns instead of indenting to make room for the bullets. I did this as an interim good-enough instead of digging into the bullet bug. I'll make a ticket.

  {{<gif webm_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/demo.webm" mp4_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/demo.mp4" alt="Rendering of the mobile app. Log in is clicked, then all Clint's locations are shown, Clint's Desk it clicked, all its smart machines are listed, and then desk-robot is clicked, showing a list of components and services belonging to that smart machine.">}}
  </div>
</div>

Flutter is Google's user interface toolkit for building applications for mobile, web, and desktop from a single codebase.

> If the existing [Viam mobile app](/fleet/#the-viam-mobile-app) doesn't fit your needs, you can use Viam's [Flutter SDK](https://flutter.viam.dev/) to build a custom app to interact with your smart machines that run on Viam.

Author: Okay yeah! Just adding link and fixing captial
```suggestion
If you're looking to monitor and control individual machines with the same functionality you have on the [**Control** tab](/fleet/machines/#control), you can use the general purpose [Viam mobile app](/fleet/#the-viam-mobile-app) rather than creating your own.
	If you need custom functionality or a custom interface, you can use Viam's [Flutter SDK](https://flutter.viam.dev/) to build a custom app to interact with your machines that run on Viam.
```

This tutorial guides you through creating a mobile app that shows your machines and their components.
As you work through this project you will learn the following:

- The basics of how Flutter works
- How to create _layouts_ in Flutter
- How to connect user interactions (such as button presses) to app behavior
- The basics of using Viam's Flutter SDK

## Requirements

> You do not need any hardware for this tutorial other than a computer running macOS or a 64-bit Linux operating system.

Reviewer 2: why not windows?

Author: My impression is that it's because this tutorial covers development for iOS, which cannot be done on Windows unless you run a virtual machine? See also question below

Reviewer 3: https://www.reddit.com/r/FlutterDev/comments/1838hcb/can_you_build_ios_apps_on_windows_with_flutter/ seems to confirm that you'd need additional tooling to build an ios app on windows.

> This tutorial assumes you already have a smart machine [configured](/build/configure/) on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

Author: Okay but for future reference, why?

## Set up your Flutter environment

> To make this documentation as straightforward as possible, this tutorial assumes you are using [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download) (VS Code) as your development environment (IDE).

Author: Ooooh. I'll apply all your feedback and then look at rewriting.

Copying aside, to the original comment here, I would say your suggestion changes the meaning; part of why we're saying that they should use VSC is so that we can tell them exactly which buttons to push etc., not just for the boilerplate.
```suggestion
This tutorial uses [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download) (VS Code) as the development environment (IDE), and uses the VS Code [Flutter extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Dart-Code.flutter) to generate necessary boilerplate code.
```

> It's free, works on all major platforms, and has great integrations with Flutter.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> It's free, works on all major platforms, and has great integrations with Flutter.

Author: Removing entirely for various reasons

You can use a different editor, but it will be easier to follow along using VS Code.

### Choose a development target

Flutter can compile and run on many different platforms.
For the purpose of this tutorial, we will be developing for iOS.

> You can always run your app on another platform later.

Author: Done; went with "...by configuring the code specific to that platform"

It's just easier to have a clear development target in mind; it makes the next step smoother.

### Install Flutter

Install Flutter according to [the Flutter documentation](https://docs.flutter.dev/get-started/install).
The instructions on the Flutter website cover not only the installation of the SDK itself, but also the development target-related tools and the editor plugins.
For this walkthrough, you only need to install the following:

- Flutter SDK
- Visual Studio Code with the [Flutter extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Dart-Code.flutter)
- The software required by your chosen development target.
  For example:
  - [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/) to target macOS
    - When prompted, do install Cocoapods.
      You need it to support the iOS simulator.
  - [Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/) to target Windows

## Create a project

### Create your first Flutter project

1. Launch VS Code and open the [command palette](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/userinterface#_command-palette) (with `F1` or `Ctrl+Shift+P` or `Shift+Cmd+P`).

2. Start typing "flutter new."
   Select the **Flutter: New Project** command.

> {{<imgproc src="/tutorials/flutter-app/flutter-new-project.png" resize="1000x" declared-dimensions="true" alt="Creating a new project in VS Code.">}}

Author: Yeah, I would've done both if I'd taken them but was trying to preserve the author's org name etc. But, this one is just generic so will re-take

3. Next, select **Application** and then choose a folder in which to create your project.
   This could be your home directory, or something like <file>C:\\src\\</file>.
4. Finally, name your project something like <file>smart_machine_app</file>.

> {{<imgproc src="/tutorials/flutter-app/project-name.png" resize="1000x" declared-dimensions="true" alt="Entering the name for the project in VS Code: 'smart_machine_app'.">}}

Author: Done!

   ```

### Configure iOS-specific code

Now you'll update some configurations in the iOS-specific code to support the [Viam Flutter SDK](https://flutter.viam.dev/).

1. Open <file>ios/Podfile</file>.
   If Podfile does not exist in that directory, you can generate it by running `flutter pub get` in the root directory of your app.

   At the top of the file you will see the following lines:

   ```{class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
   # Uncomment this line to define a global platform for your project
   # platform :ios, '11.0'
   ```

   Update that code to match the following:

   ```{class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
   # Uncomment this line to define a global platform for your project
   platform :ios, '13.0'
   ```

2. Open <file>ios/Runner/Info.plist</file>.
   It will look something like this:

   {{<imgproc src="/tutorials/flutter-app/info-plist.png" resize="1200x" declared-dimensions="true" alt="The info.plist file open in VS Code. The second line includes 'doctype plist public' and an Apple URL. The fourth line is a dict tag. The fifth line is a key, and subsequent lines contain keys, strings and arrays.">}}

> 3. Insert this code into the first line after the `<dict>`:

Author: ```suggestion
3. Insert the following code into the first line after the `<dict>`.
   These lines are [required to establish WebRTC and local  device mDNS connections](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-flutter-sdk?tab=readme-ov-file#update-infoplist).
```

                    onTap: () => _navigateToLocation(location),
                    trailing: const Icon(Icons.chevron_right),
                  );
                }));
  }
}
```

Try running your app.
Now, when you tap a location, you'll see a list of the smart machines in that location.
When you tap one of them, you'll see a list of that machine's {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="resource" text="resources" >}}:

{{<gif webm_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/demo.webm" mp4_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/demo.mp4" alt="Rendering of the mobile app. Log in is clicked, then all Clint's locations are shown, Clint's Desk it clicked, all its smart machines are listed, and then desk-robot is clicked, showing a list of components and services belonging to that smart machine." max-width="300px">}}

## Next steps

Congratulations!
You have successfully made a Flutter app integrated with Viam!

At this point you could customize the robot screen to have more functionality to control the machine or to show data from the robot in neat ways.
The Viam GitHub repo contains [more example apps](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-flutter-sdk/tree/main/example) for your reference.

> Flutter is a very powerful tool for building user interfaces.

Author: ```suggestion
```
True

> You can stylize the look and feel of your app to match your brand.

Author: ```suggestion
You can also stylize the look and feel of your app to match your brand.
```

Look around [the Flutter documentation](https://docs.flutter.dev/) to learn how.

> Before releasing your app to the app stores you’ll need to add an authentication flow to your app instead of adding API keys as environment variables.

Author: If you want to release it publicly as opposed to having it as a janky personal use app, right?

> Before releasing your app to the app stores you’ll need to add an authentication flow to your app instead of adding API keys as environment variables.

Reviewer 3: If you released the app publicly with an embedded API key, everyone using that app would be using that robot/location/organization. If you're a company, say selling vacuum robots that connect to viam, you'd want auth so that you could have their app connect to a specific robot within viam rather than all to the same robot or all to the entire organization. So yeah kinda. Let's amend this slightly

```suggestion
If you're planning to release your app for general use, you will need to add an authentication flow to your app instead of adding API keys as environment variables.
```

> Before releasing your app to the app stores you’ll need to add an authentication flow to your app instead of adding API keys as environment variables.

Author: Well yeah--what I mean by janky is you wouldn't include your env variables file in the release but people would have to manually put theirs in which would be a mega pain for most users.

---
title: "Build a Flutter App that Integrates with Viam"
linkTitle: "Build a Flutter App"
type: "docs"
description: "Use Viam's Flutter SDK to build a custom mobile app to show your machines and their components."
webmSrc: "/tutorials/flutter-app/demo.webm"
mp4Src: "/tutorials/flutter-app/demo.mp4"
videoAlt: "An example Viam-integrated Flutter app."
tags: ["sdk", "flutter"]
authors: ["Clint Purser"]
languages: ["flutter"]
viamresources: ["base"]
level: "Intermediate"
date: "2024-01-17"
cost: "0"
---

<div class="td-max-width-on-larger-screens">

>  <div class="alignleft center-if-small" style="max-width:250px; margin-right:40px">

Author: ```suggestion
 <div class="alignleft center-if-small" style="max-width:250px">
```

### Edit the YAML configuration files

1. In the VS Code file explorer, find and open the <file>pubspec.yaml</file> file.
   This file specifies your app's metadata including its current version and dependencies.

2. Delete the contents of your <file>pubspec.yaml</file> file and replace them with the following:

   ```yaml {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
   name: smart_machine_app
   description: "A Flutter app that integrates with Viam."

   publish_to: "none" # Remove this line if you wish to publish to pub.dev

   version: 1.0.0+1

   environment:
     sdk: ">=3.2.3 <4.0.0"

   dependencies:
     flutter:
       sdk: flutter
     flutter_dotenv: ^5.1.0
     image: ^4.0.17
     cupertino_icons: ^1.0.2
     viam_sdk: ^0.0.9

   dev_dependencies:
     flutter_test:
       sdk: flutter

     flutter_lints: ^2.0.0

   flutter:
     uses-material-design: true
   ```

   {{% alert title="Note" color="note" %}}

   If you named your app something other than `smart_machine_app`, change the `name` value in the first line of the <file>pubspec.yaml</file> file to the name you gave your app during setup.

   {{% /alert %}}

>    3. Next, open the <file>analysis_options.yaml</file> configuration file.

Author: That is a great question :D Maybe my linter did it at some point? Fixing.

      This file specifies how strictly Flutter should enforce best practices in your code when it checks for things like syntax errors.
      For this tutorial, you will use a less strict analyzer configuration to start, but you can always tune this later.

>       If you later publish an actual production app, you will likely want to increase the strictness of the analyzer, especially before publishing and sharing your app with others.

Author: ```suggestion
      If you later publish an actual production app, you will likely want to increase the strictness of the analyzer before sharing your app with others.
```

   3. Click the **Resource** dropdown and select your organization.
   4. Set **Role** to **Owner**.
   5. Click **Generate key**.
   6. Find your new key at the bottom of the list.

6. Use the copy buttons next to the API key ID and API key to copy each of them and paste them into your <file>.env</file> file.

{{< readfile "/static/include/snippet/secret-share.md" >}}

### Connect the login button to the home screen

In VS Code, reopen <file>main.dart</file>.

Add the following line to the imports at the top of the file:

```{class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
import 'home_screen.dart';
```

Change `ElevatedButton` in the `Column` to the following:

```{class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
            ElevatedButton(
                onPressed: () => Navigator.of(context)
                    .push(MaterialPageRoute(builder: (_) => HomeScreen())),
                child: Text('Login'),
            ),
```

Run the mobile application simulator again to see how your changes have taken effect.
Now, when you tap the login button, the app uses the API key to get the list of locations in your organization.
It displays the names of the locations on a new screen:

> {{<gif webm_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/locations-list.webm" mp4_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/locations-list.mp4" alt="Rendering of a mobile app. Log in is clicked, and then all the locations in Clint's organization are shown. One of them is clicked, but nothing changes because there is no screen associated with that button yet." max-width="300px">}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{<gif webm_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/locations-list.webm" mp4_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/locations-list.mp4" alt="Rendering of a mobile app. Log in is clicked, and then all the locations in Clint's organization are shown. One of them is clicked, but nothing changes because there is no screen associated with that button yet." max-width="300px" class="aligncenter">}}
```

        MaterialPageRoute(builder: (_) => LocationScreen(_viam, location)));
  }

  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Scaffold(
        appBar: AppBar(title: const Text('Locations')),
        // If the list is loading, show a loading indicator.
        // Otherwise, show a list of [Locations]s.
        body: _loading
            ? Center(
                child: const CircularProgressIndicator.adaptive(),
              )
            : // Build a list from the [_locations] state.
            ListView.builder(
                itemCount: _locations.length,
                itemBuilder: (_, index) {
                  final location = _locations[index];
                  return ListTile(
                    title: Text(location.name),
                    onTap: () => _navigateToLocation(location),
                    trailing: const Icon(Icons.chevron_right),
                  );
                }));
  }
}
```

Try running your app.
Now, when you tap a location, you'll see a list of the smart machines in that location.
When you tap one of them, you'll see a list of that machine's {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="resource" text="resources" >}}:

> {{<gif webm_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/demo.webm" mp4_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/demo.mp4" alt="Rendering of the mobile app. Log in is clicked, then all Clint's locations are shown, Clint's Desk it clicked, all its smart machines are listed, and then desk-robot is clicked, showing a list of components and services belonging to that smart machine." max-width="300px">}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{<gif webm_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/demo.webm" mp4_src="/tutorials/flutter-app/demo.mp4" alt="Rendering of the mobile app. Log in is clicked, then all Clint's locations are shown, Clint's Desk it clicked, all its smart machines are listed, and then desk-robot is clicked, showing a list of components and services belonging to that smart machine." max-width="300px" class="aligncenter">}}
```

## Next steps

Nice work!
You have successfully made a Flutter app integrated with Viam!

At this point you could customize the robot screen to have more functionality to control the machine or to show data from the robot in neat ways.
The Viam Flutter SDK GitHub repo contains [more example apps](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-flutter-sdk/tree/main/example) for your reference.

You can also stylize the look and feel of your app to match your brand.
Look around [the Flutter documentation](https://docs.flutter.dev/) to learn how.

Before releasing your app to the app stores you’ll need to add an authentication flow to your app instead of adding API keys as environment variables.

> If you need assistance with this, reach out to us on our Discord and we’ll be happy to help.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you need assistance with this, reach out to us on our [Discord](https://discord.gg/viam) and we’ll be happy to help.
```

This tutorial uses [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download) (VS Code) as the development environment (IDE), and uses the VS Code [Flutter extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Dart-Code.flutter) to generate necessary boilerplate code.
It's free, works on all major platforms, and has great integrations with Flutter.
You can use a different editor, but it will be easier to follow along using VS Code.

### Choose a development target

Flutter can compile and run on many different platforms.
For the purpose of this tutorial, we will be developing for iOS.

You can always run your app on another platform later by developing with a different target.

### Install Flutter

Install Flutter according to [the Flutter documentation](https://docs.flutter.dev/get-started/install).
The instructions on the Flutter website cover not only the installation of the SDK itself, but also the development target-related tools and the editor plugins.
For this walkthrough, you only need to install the following:

- Flutter SDK
- Visual Studio Code with the [Flutter extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Dart-Code.flutter)

> - The software required by your chosen development target.
>   For example:
>   - [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/) to target macOS
>     - When prompted, do install Cocoapods.
>       You need it to support the iOS simulator.
>   - [Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/) to target Windows

Author: ```suggestion
- The software required by your chosen development target.
Since the development target in this tutorial is iOS, that is [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/)
    - When prompted, do install Cocoapods.
      You need it to support the iOS simulator.
```
@nataliajacobowitz I had left Visual Studio in to help users who are referencing but diverging from this tutorial; do you think I should change it to this per conversation above?

Reviewer 2: If it is not possible at all to do this tutorial with ease on windows, then sure lets remove. Otherwise why not leave that option for people? @clintpurser since you might be familiar with the process of doing this on windows - is it easy enough to make this whole thing work there or don't bother?

Reviewer 3: we'd need to suggest they use some additional tooling which according to Reddit isn't ideal for devleopment. I think let's get this out the door as is for now and we can update the tutorial later
